Hello friends
And in this video let us discuss about depth first
search
DFS
So we have learned about graphs and how can we
travels graphs that is visit every node of the graph
We have two major methods for that one is breadth
first search BFS and the next one is depth first
search
DFS
We have already learnt about BFS which uses an Queue
and in this video let us discuss about
DFS which uses stack simply let us understand
how it is done
Let us start from vertex a so visit a insert
it into the stack and added to a visited array
Also in this array visited the vertices that are
visited will be added
Now it has a only it means only a is
visited
Now take a from stack and pushed its adjacent
nodes into the stack that is B C and D
So these are pushed into the stack and added to
the visited array also now pop the element from stack
which will be the top element which is D here
and visit its neighbours which are A B C and
E
A B c are already visited so add E into
the stack and visited array so E is pushed and inserted
to the array
Also now again pop the element from stack which is E
now visit all neighbours of E which are B
and D But both are already visited here so do
nothing and pop the next element which is C and
again all the neighbours of C are already visited
So pop again and we got B now and its
neighbours are a d and e again
All these are visited and now the stack is empty
and there are no more nodes to process
So we can say all nodes of the graph are
visited now So this is what DFS traversel is
We start from a vertex node visited it with
it all its neighbours and then choose one Vertex from
it
Then visit all its neighbours and continue so let us
See how to implement it
Define size of graph V as five now in Main
let us define the graph as an adjacency matrix
so we have arr of VV equal to this values
So the graph is defined now Now let us call
the function DFS by passing this adjacency matrix Arr and
the starting Vertex
We can start from any Vertex Here we will start
from the Vertex Zero
So control gets here and arr stored in arr and
zero is stored in source
And as we know for DFS we need two data
structures a stack and a visited array
So declare the array is visited of size V that
is five now The first step is to insert the
starting Vertex to stack and make it visited
The right push off source zero is inserted into the
stack Now make it visited in the
isVisited so  isvisited of source that is isvisited
of zero is equal to one Now we have to
visit its neighbours
For that we can use a while loop till the
stack becomes empty First remove the element from stack and
store it in node So zero is popped and stored in
node and now print zero is visited Now how can
you find its neighbours say this is vertex zero
If there is an edge from 0 to 1 1 is
neighbour of zero And if the recent edge From 0
to 2 2 is neighbour of zero and again if there
isn't edge from 0 to 3 3 is a neighbour and
it will continue like that
And how can we check that Here we can simply
check the adjacency matrix which all columns are having
value one in zero
Through we have 01 equal to 1 02 equal to 1 03
equal to one
So 1 2 and three are neighbours of zero
So this is the logic
So use a for loop for index equal to
zero index less than V index plus plus in first
iteration index is equal to zero
Next we have
If arr of node index equal to one that is we
are checking wheather index is neighbour of node or
not and isVisited of Index equal to zero that is
checking if it is already visited
So if indexes in neighbour of node and if it
is not already visited we have to add it to
the stack and make it visited
But here we have arr of 00 equal to
zero
So if fails and in next iteration index equal to
one and arr of 01 is equal to one and
isVisited of one equal to zero that is one
is not visited yet and it is a neighbour of
zero so inserted into a stack and make it visited
so isVisited of one equal to one
Now now in the next iteration index is equal to
two an arr of 02 equal to one
And isVisited of two is equal to zero
that is two is a neighbour of zero and it is
not visited yet so insert it into the stack and
make it visited
So isVisited of two is equal to one Now
now in the next iteration index is equal to a
three and arr  of 03 equal to one
An isVisited of three is equal to zero that
is three is not visited yet and it is a
neighbour of zero so inserted into the stack  make
it visited
So isVisited of three as equal to one
Now now in the next iteration index is equal to
four and arr  of 04 is equal to zero and
not one
So if fails and in next iteration index is equal
to five which is not less than V
So conditions fails and control comes out of for
loop now in next iteration of while loop we have
to remove the element from this stack and store it
in node
And three is the element at the top of the
stack
So it is popped and stored and node
Now print vertex three is visited
Now we have to visit its neighbours
So again use
The four loop in first iteration index is equal to
zero an arr  of 30 equal to one
That condition is okay but isVisited of zero is
also equal to one and not equal to zero
That is zero is neighbour of three but it is
already visited
So if fails and in next iteration index is equal
to one an arr  of 31 is equal to one
but isVisited of one is also equal to one
and not equal to zero
So again if fails here in next iteration index is
equal to two and arr  of 32 is equal to
one but isVisited of two is also equal to
one and not equal to zero
So again if fails and in next iteration index equal
to three and arr of 33 is equal to zero
So if fails again and in next iteration index is
equal to four and arr  of 34 equal to
one and isVisited of four is equal to zero
that is four is a neighbour of three and it is not
visited yet
So insert it into the stack and make it visited
So isVisited of four is equal to one now
in next iteration condition Index less than V fails and
control comes out of for loop and in the next
iteration of while Loop
Stack is not empty yet so continue perform pop operation
to remove the element at the top and store it in the
node
So four is popped and stored in node
Now print four isVisited and now we have to
visit its neighbours
But if will fail in every iteration of this for
loop since isVisited is one for every index and
in next iteration of while Loop pop the element from
Stack which will be two and print visited node is
two and again the same happens and in next iteration
popped the element from Stack which is one now and
print visited node is one and again
The same happens
And in the next iteration of while loop the condition
not isStack empty will fail since the stack is
empty now
So control comes out of while loop and the Traversel
is now completed
Now one question to you
Why did we use the isVisited array And what
will happen if we didn't use it See a traversel
means we have to visit each node
If we had an kept track of visited nodes we
would visit it again and again
And we know graphs might contain cycles and we might
get into an infinite loop
So using this Boolean array isVisited we can avoid such
issues
So this is what depth first search traversal is.